I know Gil Liberty Bank tree was set up
by Christina lapis to rehome captive
bears rescued from appalling
circumstances across Romania and Eastern
Europe the sanctuary had heard of a
female bear in captivity being kept in
very poor conditions they were planning
on saving her and taking her back to
Liberty to live out her days I went with
them to help with the Bears rescue and
relocation
it was a very early start for me and the
team was the time 2:36
and I've been awake since to feeling
fresh leaving our hotel in brush-off we
had over 400 kilometers of road between
us and the bear we hope to rescue
we are almost almost at the zoo that
were heading to we've traveled pretty
much total time will be about six hours
drive what we know is that she's a an
adult female bear she's she's alone in
this cage in solitary confinement really
the condition she's in apparently meant
to be pretty pretty dire she's in a very
small cage she
have much enrichment and as to her
overall welfare and the health I'm a
little bit apprehensive and a little bit
nervous to see kind of what condition
she's in but on arrival at the zoo it
appeared our bear and the situation she
was in was much worse than we thought
oh dear
our rescued bear will be taken back to
Liberty bear sanctuary near Zarn St the
sanctuary was opened in 2006 and is home
to 99 brown bears it is spread over 70
hectares of forest and meadow with
rivers and pools throughout
liberty was created to provide a home
for bears who have suffered from abuse
and torture
and to allow them to finally live their
lives as bears
[Music]
so just arrived and she's clearly very
stressed probably stressed in particular
because of all the action that's going
on today you should probably feel that
something is about to happen but
actually the inclusion itself it's just
a concrete floor she's got a trough for
some water here he doesn't even have the
space to be a normal bear it's really
really hard to see and as you can see
she is not a happy bear at all working
with the bear centuries but chip Rhian
we wanted to move our bear as quickly
and safely as possible the only way to
do this was by sedation this is not the
normal space for her on there
[Music]
how long does it take usually a few
minutes the Geminids now I give
thermostatic want want to take the key
long as it takes a few minutes to take
hold now just start to calm down
with the sedative starting to work on
our bear myself and the team were able
to move in and give her a quick medical
so she's just about gone down but this
all has to be very very quick the longer
she's under and I guess the higher the
risks ball so they they really don't
want to the effect of this tranquilizer
to wear off which have to pause and her
teeth chip Ryan also gave her some
injections for worms and even fitted her
with a microchip upon available in
Moscow the next bit was moving a nearly
300 kilo bear into the back of a van
[Music]
she's still asleep that was really quick
yes please go for it yep lauritha they
opened a next day let's just take the
muscle off shut the doors and it's as
simple as that that whole process must
have taken from the time she was down
and we went in 5-10 minutes Maxine
we're in she's just about woken up I
think she's feeling a bit grumpy as you
would so we're two hours into our 8-hour
journey all the way back to the Liberty
bear sanctuary and we're following that
this converted ambulance which has our
brown bear inside
there's a real feeling of relief and
satisfaction there's gonna be grass and
drew feet there's gonna be large areas
to roam and she's overall going to be in
a better place and have a better welfare
[Music]
just did a bit of preparation this is
the one this is in here yes this will
just be some other supplier it was for
her she's had quite a stressful day
there's been a lot going on a lot to
take you new surroundings so just
somewhere where she can just rest up and
demo and become evening keeping it
straight huh now she's awake
it's a very heavy bear so that was
really the tricky bit getting her down
these tracks that we've built and I we
just have to get it into that room where
she will stay for the whole night
she's in she's in just like that without
bare settling into a new home
chip Rina Kristina had one more bit of
news for me I mean our friends
association with Kristina
yeah they decide to put the name of
their lease if you are agree with that
you have to come back to see I have a
band named after me but my trip was
going to get even better
the following morning Christina
introduced me to the sanctuaries
youngest resident Bridget Bridget
Bridget is three months old
and why is Bridget here Bridget is here
because the mother was killed was shot
and she remained alone in the forest and
she couldn't manage another my animal
would have killed her and and in a few
months she's gonna be a lot bigger this
is I think in three months we shall not
affect her like this
[Music]
this one knows how to be a bear she will
know how to be a bear run around with
Lizzy the bear now bringing the bear
numbers at the sanctuary to 100 I wanted
to lend a hand and help the team feed
their hungry bears so Christina what are
in these blocks there is your boy okay
we through it and this is like an ice
cream for them ready ready
here we go the Bears are fed a variety
of sweet and savory food from fruits and
nuts to bread and meat the sanctuary
vary the times and locations of the
feedings each day to try and replicate
life in the wild as much as possible you
know it's so lovely to see these bears
just calmly eating food but it's really
exciting to think of our there doing
exactly the same very soon launch it in
[Music]
this is it this will be the release of
Lizzy into the first training area so a
little bit nervous I think Lizzy is as
well right Lizzy's a little bit nervous
too after so many years in a cage she
doesn't know what what is outside let's
hope that she will come here trained out
[Music]
I'm really amazed I think it's one of
the best experience with the bear
release with listen wait lazy
really yeah
see her from yesterday and kind of come
with her on the journey it's a little
bit emotional because you just see how
this bear could have so much and now
does just the best feeling it really is
now she can live the life of a bear yeah
for the rest of the life some yes many
years we don't know but at least few in
live the bear is brilliant
[Music]
you know when I look at the bear I see
this enormous animal this intelligent
creature clearly very sociable
[Music]
the reality is they should not be in
cages
luckily places like the Liberty best
century offer a place for these bears
that have been in captivity and
mistreated to go to to live a much
happier life
[Music]
thank you for coming on this journey
with us if you'd like to see more from
the channel just click here or to
subscribe click here and we'll see you
soon here on earth unplugged